Semantic Forms Inputs is an extension to MediaWiki that provides
additional input types for the Semantic Forms extension.

The Semantic Forms extension allows users to add, edit and query data
of a Semantic MediaWiki-based wiki using forms. For every form field
the input type specifies the type of input a field will have in the
form. Semantic Forms comes with basic input types for all data
types. This extension -- Semantic Forms Inputs -- aims to collect
further, visually and/or functionally enhanced input types.

For the full description, see the Semantic Forms Inputs homepage:
http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:Semantic_Forms_Inputs

This software is licensed under the GNU General Public License (GPL).
See the COPYING file for more information.

== Installation ==

Having Semantic MediaWiki and Semantic Forms installed is a
precondition for the Semantic Forms Inputs extension; the code
will not work without it. The version of Semantic Forms must be at
least 2.0 for the 'simpledatepicker' input to work.

For the 'datepicker' input to work the Yahoo! User Interface (YUI)
Javascript library (version 2.7.0b or higher) must be available,
either locally or via an existing internet connection.

(The HeaderTabs extension 0.6.6 seems to work with 2.7.0b with some
small change in the HeaderTabs.php: Remove the if-clause in lines 118
.. 126, then remove " . style" from line 127. The catch with that
solution is, that the browser history feature of the Header Tabs will
still not work, so you will have to deactivate it.)

To install Semantic Forms Inputs, create a directory named
SemanticFormsInputs in the extensions directory of your MediaWiki
installation and copy the extension's files into it. Then add the
following line to your LocalSettings.php below the inclusion of the
Semantic Forms extension:

require_once('extensions/SemanticFormsInputs/SemanticFormsInputs.php');

== Credits ==

Semantic Forms Inputs was written by Stephan Gambke, Sanyam Goyal and
Yaron Koren.

The 'datepicker' input uses the Yahoo! User Interface (YUI) library.
See http://developer.yahoo.com/yui/ .

The 'simpledatepicker' input uses the jQuery and jQuery UI libraries.
See http://jquery.org/ and http://jqueryui.com/ .

Button icons are derived from the Mini Icons 2 icon set from
brandspankingnew.net. See
http://www.brandspankingnew.net/archive/2006/12/hohoho.html


== Contact ==

Comments, questions, bug reports and suggestions can be send or posted
to:

* the appropriate Semantic MediaWiki mailing list:
  http://sourceforge.net/projects/semediawiki/support

* the Semantic Forms Inputs discussion page on mediawiki.org:
  http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension_talk:Semantic_Forms_Inputs

* Stephan Gambke: f.trott@gmx.net
