The GIS extension is based on the experience learned from WikiProject 
Geographical coordinates. The extensions can be enabled individually, but
the concept is certainly more powerful when they are all enabled. 

The extensions consist of:

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A. The geo tag extension

The <geo> tag allows entry of geographical coordinates something in style
with RFC1876. For example:

   <geo>48 46 36 N 121 48 51 W</geo>.

It is designed to be flexible, and easy to use.

Variations of the above allows specification with decimals in various forms, 
allowing less or more precision. Additional meta-data can also be specified
as attributes for the location, like this:

       <geo>48 46 36 N 121 48 51 W type:mountain region:US scale:100000</geo>

In the rendered article, the tag will be replaced with 
48*46'36''N 121*48'51''W, which is also a Wikilink to a page of map
resources for that point.

The main geo tag advantages are:

1. Consistent markup for coordinates.
2. Consistent rendering of coordinates.
3. Wikipedia articles with coordinates will get a 'geo.position' meta tag, 
   making it compatible with Internet geographic resources, such as 
   geourl.org.
4. Serves as an enabler for the two other extensions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
B. The map sources extension

The map sources extension is the target of the <geo> tag wikilink, and
provides a page of available Internet map resources, in a manner much like
the ISBN resource page. The extension provides functionality to 'preload' 
external URLs with coordinates, so that most maps are essentially one click 
away.

There are currently 30 different built in replacement strings, supporting 
various form of specification of scaling and coordinates, such as UTM, 
OSGB36 and CH1903.

There exists specialized versions of the map sources page for various 
regions (like US and GB). For the global version, there are at present
preloaded pointers to around 20 different map engines.

In addition to the maps, there is a pointer to GeoURL.org, which lists
nearby resources on the Internet.

There is also a direct link for the open source NASA World Wind software,
allowing a new, interactive way of experiencing for aerial imagery and
topological data. World Wind has a plug-in layer for Wikipedia articles
that are tagged with a geographic coordinate.

Assuming the enabling of extension C, there is also a pointer to neighbor-
hood articles in Wikipedia, listing the articles with Wikilinks, and their
distance and direction from the present point.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
C. The geo database extension

The geo database keeps track of all articles in Wikipedia with geographic
coordinates, and provides the data source for the neighborhood information,
as well as the data source for other external mechanisms taking advantage
of the Wikipedia geographical information, such as the NASA World Wind
Wikipedia overlay.

Additionally, the geo database will provide data for the future Wikimap,
so that the maps produced by Wikimaps will contain all the relevant 
information from Wikipedia as clickable points. For this, geo attributes
are crucial: Airports really should appear as airports on the map, 
mountains as mountains, and cities as cities, with the right magnitude.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For further information, see also 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:WikiProject_Geographical_coordinates

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Status

Currently extensions A and B are quite well developed, and have been tested
for a time on an external server. Additionally, a few thousand articles in 
the en: Wikipedia are marked with geographic coordinates using an interim 
solution with templates, as a proof-of-concept.  They will be converted to
the geo tag if this extension gets enabled for the English Wikipedia. That
will also solve the current problem with coordinates as arguments for 
infobox templates. Collection of data points have been done with an interim,
external solution based on some Perl scripts.

Extension C has also been implemented, but I would want to discuss a few 
issues of performance and security before committing the code. More about
this later.

Magnus Manske has been extremely helpful in the work on integration with 
Wikimaps, and that work will continue.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, I would like to give a big thank you to all participants in 
WikiProject Geographical coordinates who have helped immensely with 
suggestions practical work.

Egil Kvaleberg
en:User:Egil
