MediaWiki MicroID extension

version 0.2
1 Dec 2007

This is the README file for the MicroID extension for MediaWiki
software. The extension is only useful if you've got a MediaWiki
installation; it can only be installed by the administrator of the site.

See http://svn.wikimedia.org/svnroot/mediawiki/branches/REL1_10/extensions/MicroID/
for a verion compatible with MediaWiki < REL1_11.

The extension lets users verify their account on the wiki with an
external service that understands MicroID (http://www.microid.org/). A
microid is a special hash of the user's email address and user page
URL that asserts that the user has that particular email address. One
service that understands MicroID is ClaimID (http://claimid.com/).

This is an early version of the extension and it's almost sure to have
bugs. (Don't despair, though: this is running in production on
Wikitravel [http://wikitravel.org/], a fairly big MW installation.)
See the BUGS section below for info on how to report problems.

== License ==

Copyright 2006 Internet Brands (http://www.internetbrands.com/)

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA

== Author ==

Evan Prodromou <evan@wikitravel.org>

== Pre-requisites ==

This software was tested with MediaWiki 1.8.2 (which is what
Wikitravel was running at the time.) It may or may not work with
earlier or later versions, but please test it.

It requires PHP 4.3.0 or greater to get the sha1() function to
generate the special microid hash. 

== Installation ==

To install, copy all the files in the archive you downloaded to the
MicroID subdirectory of the extensions subdirectory of your MediaWiki
installation.

In your MediaWiki LocalSettings.php, add the following line some place
towards the bottom of the file:

	require_once("$IP/extensions/MicroID/MicroID.php");

Theoretically it should work out of the box. On your wiki, if you go
to to the [[Special:Version]] page, you should see the MicroID
extension listed.

== Usage ==

The usage of the MicroID extension is mostly passive. User pages for
registered users who have an email address stored in the system, and
who've confirmed the address (or confirmation is disabled), and who've
enabled MicroID (see below), will have a special <meta> tag with an
appropriate MicroID. The page can be provided to identification
services as verification of ownership of the account.

== Privacy ==

MicroID lets an external entity that knows an email address and the
URL of a user page verify that the owner of that user page is also the
owner of that email address. The external entity can't figure out the
email address if they don't know it already; they can just confirm a
tip (or guess).

Because there may be cases where this is unacceptable to the user,
each user can optionally enable or disable whether MicroIDs are
created. A checkbox on the "Misc" tab of [[Special:Preferences]] lets
the user decide whether or not to have a microid on their user page.

== Configuration ==

The administrator can decide whether MicroIDs are generated by
default, or if the default is that the IDs will not be generated. In
the LocalSettings.php file, you can turn on the default by adding this
line:

    $wgDefaultUserOptions['microid'] = 1;

You can turn off the default by adding this line:

    $wgDefaultUserOptions['microid'] = 0;

== Translation ==

The text of the MicroID checkbox on the user preferences page can be
changed or translated like other MediaWiki interface string. The key
is 'tog-microid', and on most systems editing
[[MediaWiki:Tog-microid]] as an administrator will be enough to modify
the prompt.

== Bugs and enhancements ==

If MicroIDs are not verifying correctly, check that the $wgServer
configuration variable is set and is correct.

Bugs or feature requests can be sent to the author at
evan@wikitravel.org.

