This software requires Apache, MySQL, and PHP.  Apache and
MySQL versions are reasonably sane, so it shouldn't make
much difference which you use.  But PHP seems to make major
changes to the language on a whim with each release, so it's
not unlikely that you'll have to make some changes depending
on which version you have.

Wikipedia.org is running 1.3.26, MySQL 3.23.51, and PHP 4.2.2.
PHP must be configured with "register_globals" on.
Wikipedia's live installation also uses APC, but that's not
required.

To install the software, either put all the scripts in the
same directory or else put the .phtml files in one directory
and the .php files in PHP's include path.  The scripts in
the "maintenance" subdirectory also need to be able to
include the main scripts, so they too must either be copied
to the same directory as the scripts, or else have the
scripts in PHP's include path.

Use either "createdb.php" or "convertdb.php" from the
maintenance directory to initialize the database, but not
both (use "convertdb.php" only if upgrading from Phase II).
You must also run "rebuildindexes.php" to build the search
index tables.

Edit LocalSettings.php to reflect local installation paths
and such.

Here are some more notes on building a system from scratch
the way it was done for the Wikipedia server:

Downloads:

  gcc-2.95.3.tar.gz
  mysql-3.23.51.tar.gz
  libiconv-1.8.tar.gz
  apache_1.3.26.tar.gz
  php-4.2.1.tar.gz
  apc-cvs.tar.gz

And for TeX support:
  ocaml-3.06.tar.gz
  (TeTeX and ImageMagick come with most Linux distros)

1. MySQL strongly recommends using gcc 2.95 to compile MySQL.
  RedHat Linux comes with 2.96 by default, so you'll have to install
  2.95 first.  Use "../gcc*/configure --enable-shared"

2. Install MySQL source; add "mysql" user and group. Make sure the
  directory into which you installed gcc 2.95 appears before the
  directory of gcc 2.96 in your path.  Configure with:

  FLAGS="-O3 -mpentiumpro" CXX=gcc CXXFLAGS="-O3 -mpentiumpro -felide-constructors -fno-exceptions -fno-rtti" ./configure --prefix=/usr/local/mysql --enable-assembler --with-mysqld-ldflags=-all-static --disable-shared --with-extra-charset=complex

  Edit the file myisam/ftdefs.h, changing the define for minimum word
  length for fulltext indexing: #define MIN_WORD_LEN 2.  Build and
  install according to instructions.  Make root user.

3. Check out PHP code from "newcodebase" directory in CVS.  If desired,
  update FulltextStoplist.php from the MySQL sources.  Choose passwords
  for "wikiuser" and "wikiadmin", and create those users in MySQL.
  There should be a script in the maintenance directory to help with
  that.

4. Optionally, install libiconv.  This will be used by some language
  packages for converting native-charset URLs to and from UTF-8.

5. Unpack Apache distribution and begin configuring, but don't finish
  build yet.  Configure with:

   OPTIM='-O2 -mpentiumpro' ./configure --with-layout=Apache

5a. If using recommended mod_rewrite configuration, install the included
  patch 'apache-ampersand.diff' which is needed to support page titles
  with ampersands in them:

   patch -p0 < /path/to/maintenance/apache-ampersand.diff

6. Unpack and configure PHP.  Configure with:

  ./configure --enable-apc --with-mysql=/usr/local/mysql --with-iconv=/usr/local/lib --with-apache=/home/lee/src/apache_1.3.26

  (using your own local paths, of course).  Build and install as
  instructed.  Set "register_globals" on in the config file.

7. Finish building Apache.  Configure with:

  OPTIM='-O2 -mpentiumpro' ./configure --with-layout=Apache --enable-module=rewrite --activate-module=src/modules/php4/libphp4.a

  Update httpd.conf as needed for your site.  For example:

  <IfModule mod_php4.c>
    AddType application/x-httpd-php .php .php4 .phtml
    AddType application/x-httpd-php-source .phps
  </IfModule>
  <IfModule mod_php4.c>
    php_admin_flag engine off
  </IfModule>
  <Directory "DIRECTORY_OF_WIKI_SCRIPTS">
    <IfModule mod_php4.c>
      php_admin_flag engine on
    </IfModule>
  </Directory>
  RewriteEngine On
  RewriteMap ampescape int:ampescape
  RewriteRule ^/wiki/(.*)$ /wiki.phtml?title=${ampescape:$1} [L]

8. Optionally, install APC, following standard instructions for
  installing as a Zend extension.

9. If using embedded TeX support, be sure TeX and ImageMagick are
  installed (they are common on most Linux distros and freely
  downloadable). Also get and install OCaml according to its
  instructions.

  You'll need to compile the 'texvc' helper script; enter the 'math'
  subdirectory of the source tree and run 'make'.

  If you don't want tmbeddex TeX support, disable it by setting

   $wgUseTex = false;

  in LocalSettings.php

10. Create 'upload' and (for TeX) 'math' and 'tmp' directories which
  are writable by the apache process and web-accessible. Set the pathnames
  and URLs for these appropriately in LocalSettings.php.

