2002-05-30

This is a new codebase that attempts to reproduce (more or less
exactly, modulo some bugs and some things I don't like) the
functionality of Magnus Manske's PHP Wikipedia software.  I've
stolen a lot of Magnus and Brion's code, and nearly all of their
database structure and output design, changing only those things
I thought needed fixing (namepsaces are in a separate database
field, for example, and I made the stylesheets external).

This new codebase, however, should be much easier to test, debug,
enchance, and customize.  My primary motivation, in fact, is
wanting to have this software for my own site, and not being
happy with either the limited functionality of UseMod or the
incomprehensible code of the existing PHP stuff.

In its present state, it is minimally functional, and will do
only the basic Wiki view pages and edit pages, and user logins.
It has hooks for future internationalization, but no other
languages are currently ported.  The existing code had dozens
of little bits of English text still hardcoded, and kept text
to be intenationalized in globals.  I've taken care of both of
those problems, and the new code should be fully localizable
by changing just the one class.

You'll need to convert the database before you run it as well.
There's a running installation on
http://www.piclab.com/newwiki/wiki.phtml , and I can be talked
into giving accounts there, though I think it should be possible
to get this running on SourceForge as well.

The copyright issue is complicated.  At this point, the vast
majority of the code is probably mine, and therefore public
domain.  However there are still things shamelessly stolen from
sources with more GPL-like terms, and Magnus's original version
is still under GPL.  The DiffEngine, for example, is taken
almost verbatim.  So, it is safe to use any of this code under
GPL terms.  If you want to use some particular part of it under
less restrictive terms, you'll have to figure out if I wrote it
or not--probably the easiest way to do that is to ask me.  But
I'm not coing to bother cataloguing every line.

-- Lee Daniel Crocker <lee@piclab.com>

